finding a pilot job can be a difficult
task especially if you have low
experience so when you get that phone
call for an interview you certainly
don't want to blow it in this video I'm
going to tell you everything you need to
know to successfully pass a pilot
interview and give you some sample
questions or answers recruiters could
ask welcome back
aviators happy to see all your smiling
faces ready to consume some aviation
content if you're new to my channel my
name is yaara and I take the mystery out
of the aviation industry so consider
subscribing for more videos just like
this in this video I'm going to explain
the different types of interviews give
you some pro tips during the interview
process share with you the formula that
has helped me pass every single one of
my pilot interviews and give you some
examples of questions and answers our
recruiters could ask let's get into an
interview in Canada consists of all or a
combination of a psychological or
cognitive test a technical exam and a
panel interview this will change
slightly from company to company as some
companies have the technical portion on
a tablet others do it as part of the
panel interview some companies are even
incorporating a pre-interview video
submission where you record several
answers on a video and submit it online
before you get invited for an in-person
interview I'm not going to focus on the
technical portion of the interview in
this video because that's pure studying
instead I'm gonna focus on the panel
interview to help you make the best
first impression possible so what should
you do prior to the interview to give
you the highest chance of success study
and preparation just like flying takes a
lot of practice and studying so does an
interview the first task is to learn
absolutely everything you possibly can
about the company you are interviewing
with create a word document and
copy/paste everything that's important
in there from the company's website so
you can keep things organized and refer
to back later when you need to study or
memorize facts about the company
you should know their mission statement
in history when in this company's start
and what has made them successful up
until now no their fleet types in size
some of the destinations their bases
keep people like the CEO director of
flight operations in chief pilot their
financial performance both this year in
the last five or 10 years
recent company news both good and bad
and industry threats like well prices
competition and market saturation you
are the one that applied to this company
and want to spent several years there or
maybe your whole career so invest the
time and learning everything you can
about them this will not only help you
in the interview but will impress the
interview panel about your commitment
level if they see how much prep work you
put into the interview that will show
them your character and work ethic and
the company can be confident you will
put in the same amount of work into your
training and we're flying the line next
make sure you dress well I'm not talking
about a suit and tie but business casual
is a great place to start your
appearance is the first impression the
interview panel will get and it will set
the tone for them of who you are and how
much effort you put into your appearance
remember when you are wearing the
airline's uniform you are representing
the company and if you show up looking
like a slob for your interview you might
look the same wearing their uniform then
make sure to arrive early there's
nothing more awkward than you bursting
through the front door all sweaty and
flustered not a professional look for
any pilot you want to walk in there cool
as a cucumber with style and confidence
because remember you never know who's
watching some companies even ask the
receptionist their opinion of you where
you're nice and courteous rude and
obnoxious and only started smiling for
the interview panel lastly when you do
me the interview panel make sure to
present yourself with confidence smile
have a firm handshake and talk with a
loud voice even if you're super shy and
nervous keep that hidden on the inside
and present yourself with confidence now
let's talk about the panel interview the
panel will consist of two or three
people a flight ops
Zinaida either a management pilot or
line captain and an HR representative
the questions will be tell us about a
time when for Matt and to help you
answer them successfully use the spare
format this format is what I personally
use in every single one of my pilot
interviews during my pilot career and it
works flawlessly it stands for situation
briefly explain the situation where the
problem occurred problem state the
problem faced action state what you did
to resolve the problem result what
happened good or bad successful or
unsuccessful experience when you took
away or learn from this event first pick
a scenario from your personal experience
that best fits the question if you have
little flying experience or this is your
first pilot job then pick something from
relevant past experiences or jobs you've
had as part of your studying and
interview preparation you should come up
with a bank of different situations you
can draw from this way they can be fit
or molded to different questions and you
will always have an answer for the
recruiter for example tell us a time
when you made a mistake and what did you
learn from it early on in my flying
career I entered Class C controlled
airspace without a clearance by accident
not that I've presented the interview
panel with my situation what problem are
consequences that my actions have by
entering controlled airspace without a
clearance I could have been causing a
conflict with other traffic or impeding
on arrivals or departures and Eric
traffic control would have had to divert
aircraft around me because they weren't
in communication with me under the
action tell them exactly what you did to
resolve the problem one thing in
aviation that's important is to always
fess up to your mistakes because hiding
them will have larger consequences than
admitting to them and learning from them
what I did was I immediately dialed up
the correct frequency and contact that
center told them what has happened that
I entered their airspace without a
clearance where I was and what my
intention
under the results what happened how do
we resolve this issue after contacting
center they didn't even realize that I
had entered their airspace and they were
courteous and let me know that I was
Raider identified and that I could push
seed as planned and luckily I didn't
cause any conflicts in their airspace
finally conclude with an outcome a
resolution of the situation explain what
you learned from it and how it will help
you in the future as pilots we're always
learning from our past experiences and
mistakes and recruiters will want to
know how you are improving yourself what
I learned from the situation was to be
stricter at reading the maps and not
allow myself to get too complacent as
you build hours and experience you also
build your confidence and sometimes I
can lead to your cocky attitude and that
is where you have to check yourself
become stricter with your
decision-making and be a more
professional pilot now I want to give
you an example of three interview
question and answers following the spare
model tell us about an emergency you've
been in when I was a flight instructor I
was out in the practice area with a
student when all of a sudden the engine
made a loud bang
now what happened was the compression
spring and one of the valves broke and
the valve was stuck so when the piston
came up the valve punctured a hole right
through the piston immediately what I
did was take control from the student
put in the car Pete and start turning
back towards the airport luckily we were
only fifty minutes away from the airport
and we were able to lift the airplane
back to a safe landing without the
engine quitting and taxied off the
runway what I learned from this event is
how important emergency training is and
how to stay cool and collected under
pressure especially if you have a
student with you it reinforced the fact
that why emergency training is so
important why we do force landing stall
steep turns all of these maneuvers
because if something happens in real
life we have to act without thinking I
also learn things about myself and how I
actually react during a real emergency
situation how cool and collected I state
and how I was able to land the airplane
safely have you ever had a personality
conflict with someone you worked with
yes I flew with a captain who was loud
and obnoxious and would not listen to
anything his first officer said the
problem is this is a complete breakdown
in CRM where the captain just barks
orders and doesn't listen to his first
officers and this could lead to a
serious incident or accident first
officers have to have the ability and
confidence to bring any kind of
information to the captain to have him
make an informed decision if things are
going sideways and there have been a lot
of crashes that have been caused by this
kind of attitude what I did was instead
of getting mad and upset I addressed the
situation head-on and spoke with the
captain directly I explained to him that
even though I was a first officer we had
nearly the same amount of hours I told
him that he couldn't talk to me this way
and that my input was no less relevant
than his at the end of the conversation
we came to a conclusion in a
compromising he understood where I was
coming from and that gave me a little
bit more respect in his
what I learned from this event is to be
able to speak with confidence argue only
with facts not emotions and not let
yourself get walked all over CRM is
critical in the flight deck and you
cannot have such a communication
breakdown when you're dealing with
emergencies bad weather or just daily
operations at the end of the day our job
is to get everybody from point A to
point B safely and nobody wins when
there's a conflict in the flight deck
what is your greatest weakness now
before you answer this question you have
to make sure that you find a weakness in
yourself that can be turned into a
strength
you don't want the weakness to be so
terrible that the airline doesn't want
to hire you and you don't want to use
something silly like you pick your nose
when no one's watching so this is what I
use my greatest weakness is that I am
too hard on myself since I'm a quick
learner and I typically get things from
the first attempt if I don't succeed
right away I get angry and beat myself
up and dwell on the past what I have
learned to do is to recognize when this
is happening and prove that myself from
spiraling down into negativity as a
result I have learned not to dwell on
the past but instead can analyze my
mistakes in a non emotional way and
learn from them so I can move forward
what I learned is that there is always a
silver lining even if we don't see it
right away
by staying cool and level-headed and
analyzing where your mistakes were you
can improve much faster than dwelling on
the past and beating yourself up about
it this has helped me a lot in the
airlines when we go for simulator
testing every six months instead of
beating myself up about the previous
mistakes I have made in the last
simulator session I go into the next
simulator session better prepared by
analyzing my previous mistakes and being
okay making new mistakes that I will
learn from aviation safety is based on a
Swiss cheese model that mistakes will
happen but it's our job to trap them in
conclusion your success during an
interview will be directly correlated
with how much work you put in becoming
good at interviews takes a lot of
practice and hard work and you can find
dozen
pilot interview questions online to
practice with a big tip is to practice
your interview questions out loud
I used to talk to myself for hours
practicing for an interview because
formulating sentences out loud there's
much different than practicing in your
head this way you also get better at
coming up with different scenarios and
past experiences to draw from if a
recruiter asks you a question you are
not prepared for so I hope this video
helped you understand the pilot
interview process and gave you the tools
to be successful so smash the like
button if you enjoyed this video check
out the best tasting coffee on the go
and I'll see you in the next video
[Music]